Adding Message Trigger Tutorial to cylc-docs. (#105)
cylc/cylc-doc: src/tutorial/furthertopics/message-triggers.rst

.. _tutorial-cylc-message-triggers:

Message Triggers
================

:term:`Message triggers <message trigger>` allow us to trigger dependent tasks 
before the initial task has fully completed. 

Explanation
-----------

We have seen :ref:`before <tutorial-qualifiers>` that tasks can have 
:term:`qualifiers <qualifier>` for different 
:term:`task states <task state>`.
:term:`Message triggers <message trigger>` are essentially custom qualifiers.
We can produce a bespoke output while our task is still running.
This output could be, for example, a report or perhaps another task. 

Usage
-----

> :term:`Message triggers <message trigger>` are particularily useful if we have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:term:`Message triggers <message trigger>` are particularly useful if we have
```

         mkdir ~/cylc-run/message-triggers
         cd ~/cylc-run/message-triggers

   #. **Install the script needed for our suite**

      The suite we will be designing requires a bash script, ``random.sh``,
      to produce our report. It will simply create a text file ``report.txt``
      with some random numbers in it. This will be executed when the associated
      task is run. 

      Scripts should be kept in the ``bin`` sub-directory within the 
      :term:`suite directory <suite directory>`. If a ``/bin`` exists in the 
      suite directory, it will be prepended to the PATH at run time.
      
      Create a ``/bin`` directory.
      
      .. code-block:: bash

         mkdir ~/cylc-run/message-triggers/bin
             
      Create a bash script in the bin directory:    

      .. code-block:: bash

         touch bin/random.sh
 
      Open the file and paste the following basic bash script into it:

      .. code-block:: bash

         #!/usr/bin/env bash
         set -eu

         counter=1

         while [ $counter -le 10 ]; do
            newrand=$[ (( $RANDOM % 40) + 1 ) ];
            echo $newrand >> report.txt;
            counter=$[($counter + 1)];

>          done

Reviewer: You'll need to remind the user to `chmod +x bin/random.sh` or the suite will fall over because you won't be allowed to execute...

                         random.sh
                        
                         sleep 2
                         random.sh
                                            
                         sleep 2
                         random.sh
                     """

             [[another_weather_task, different_weather_task]]
                 script = sleep 1

      
   #. **Create message triggers.**

      We now have a suite with a task, ``long_forecasting_task`` which, after
      it has fully completed, triggers two more tasks, ``another_weather_task``
      and ``different_weather_task``.

      Suppose we want ``another_weather_task`` and ``different_weather_task``
      to start before ``long_forecasting_task`` has fully completed, perhaps
      after some data has become available. 
      
      In this case, we shall trigger ``another_weather_task`` after one set of 
      random numbers has been created
      and ``different_weather_task`` after a second set of random numbers has
      been created.    
      
      There are three aspects of creating messsage triggers. 
      The first is to create the messages within ``runtime`` in our suite

>       - we need to create a sub-section called ``outputs``. Here we create

Reviewer: This makes it sound like
`[runtime][outputs]` wheras it's actually `[runtime][TASK][outputs]`

      our custom outputs.  

      .. code-block:: diff

         +        [[[outputs]]]
         +            update1 = "Task partially complete, report ready to view"
         +            update2 = "Task partially complete, report updated" 

      The second thing we need to do is to create a cylc message in our script.
      This should be placed where you want the message to be called. In our 
      case, this is after each of the first two set of random numbers are
      generated. 
      
      .. tip::
         Remember that the ``cylc message`` should exactly match the outputs 
         stated in our ``[[[outputs]]]`` section.

      Modify the ``[[long_forecasting_task]]`` script in the ``suite.rc`` file
      as follows:

      .. code-block:: diff

         [runtime]

             [[long_forecasting_task]]
                 script = """
                     sleep 2
                     random.sh
         +           cylc message -- "${CYLC_SUITE_NAME}" "${CYLC_TASK_JOB}" \

>                          "Task partially complete, report ready to view"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+                          "Task partially complete, report ready to view"
```

                     sleep 2
                     random.sh
         +           cylc message -- "${CYLC_SUITE_NAME}" "${CYLC_TASK_JOB}" \

>                          "Task partially complete, report updated"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+                         "Task partially complete, report updated"
```

* add ``cylc message -- "${CYLC_SUITE_NAME}" "${CYLC_TASK_JOB}" "YOUR CHOSEN TRIGGER MESSAGE"``
     to the ``script`` section of ``[runtime]``, your chosen trigger message 
     should be unique and should exactly match the message defined in
     ``[[outputs]]``.  

* Refer to these messages in the ``[dependencies]`` section of our suite.

These outputs are then triggered during the running of the task.    
We can use these to manage tasks dependant on partially completed tasks.

So, a basic example, where we have a task foo, that when partially completed 
triggers another task bar and when fully completed triggers another task, baz. 

   .. code-block:: cylc

      [scheduling]
         [[dependencies]]
         graph = """foo:out1 => bar
                     foo => baz"""
      [runtime]
         [[foo]]
            script = """
               sleep 5
               cylc message -- "${CYLC_SUITE_NAME}" "${CYLC_TASK_JOB}" "file 1 done"
               sleep 10
                  """
            [[[outputs]]]
               out1 = "file 1 done"
                  
         [[bar, baz]]
            script = sleep 10

.. _message triggers practical:

.. practical::

>    .. rubric:: In this practical we will create a suite to demonstrate

Author: Apparently, just Bristish English - I had no idea this wasn't used all over the place. I will change this. Chatting to Tim about it and we think we use it in a similar way that we would say. "In this exercise...." Using nouns as verbs in education seems to be quite frequent here!
And sorry for not replying sooner - I think I need to change my github settings, I'm not getting notifications as I used to.

      :term:`message triggers <message trigger>`. We will use message triggers
      to both produce a report and trigger a new task from a partially completed
      task.

   #. **Create a new directory.**

      Within your ``~/cylc-run`` directory create a new directory called 

      ``message-triggers`` and move into it:

      .. code-block:: bash

         mkdir ~/cylc-run/message-triggers
         cd ~/cylc-run/message-triggers

   #. **Install the script needed for our suite**

      The suite we will be designing requires a bash script, ``random.sh``,
      to produce our report. It will simply create a text file ``report.txt``
      with some random numbers in it. This will be executed when the associated
      task is run. 

      Scripts should be kept in the ``bin`` sub-directory within the 
      :term:`suite directory <suite directory>`. If a ``/bin`` exists in the 

>       suite directory, it will be prepended to the PATH at run time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      suite directory, it will be prepended $PATH at run time.
```
(This may be a bit pedantic, but I'd say either $PATH, or "the executable search path").

         +            update2 = "Task partially complete, report updated" 

      The second thing we need to do is to create a cylc message in our script.
      This should be placed where you want the message to be called. In our 
      case, this is after each of the first two set of random numbers are
      generated. 
      
      .. tip::
         Remember that the ``cylc message`` should exactly match the outputs 
         stated in our ``[[[outputs]]]`` section.

      Modify the ``[[long_forecasting_task]]`` script in the ``suite.rc`` file
      as follows:

      .. code-block:: diff

         [runtime]

             [[long_forecasting_task]]
                 script = """
                     sleep 2
                     random.sh
         +           cylc message -- "${CYLC_SUITE_NAME}" "${CYLC_TASK_JOB}" \
                          "Task partially complete, report ready to view"
                     sleep 2
                     random.sh
         +           cylc message -- "${CYLC_SUITE_NAME}" "${CYLC_TASK_JOB}" \
                          "Task partially complete, report updated"
                     sleep 2
                     random.sh
                 """

>       Lastly, we need to do is to make reference to the messages in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Lastly, we need to make reference to the messages in the
```

      graph section. 

>       This will ensure our messages are triggered correctly. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      This will ensure our tasks trigger off of messages correctly. 
```
(is that what you mean?)

                            long_forecasting_task[-P2M] => long_forecasting_task
                        """

            [runtime]

                [[long_forecasting_task]]
                    script = """
                        sleep 2
                        random.sh
                        cylc message -- "${CYLC_SUITE_NAME}" "${CYLC_TASK_JOB}" \
                            "Task partially complete, report ready to view"
                        sleep 2
                        random.sh
                        cylc message -- "${CYLC_SUITE_NAME}" "${CYLC_TASK_JOB}" \
                            "Task partially complete, report updated"
                        sleep 2
                        random.sh
                    """

                    [[[outputs]]]
                        update1 = "Task partially complete, report ready to view"
                        update2 = "Task partially complete, report updated"

                [[another_weather_task, different_weather_task]]
                    script = sleep 1

   #. **Validate the suite.**

      It is a good idea to check that our ``suite.rc`` file does not have any

>       configuaration issues. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      configuration issues. 
```

      Run `cylc validate` to check for any errors:

      .. code-block:: bash      

          cylc validate .
   
   #. **Run the suite.**

      Now we are ready to run our suite. Open the Cylc GUI by running the
      following command:

      .. code-block:: bash

         cylc gui message-triggers &

      Run the suite either by pressing the play button in the Cylc GUI or by
      running the command:

      .. code-block:: bash

         cylc run message-triggers

      Your suite should now run, the tasks should succeed. 

   #. **Inspect the work directory.**

>       We can now check for our report outputs. These should appear in the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      You can now check for your report outputs. These should appear in the 
```

This is a matter of subjective style I guess, but you're mostly refering to "we" and "our", but occasionally "Your" (line 356).  Personally I think "you" and "your" is a bit more direct and snappy.

                            long_forecasting_task[-P2M] => long_forecasting_task
                        """
            [runtime]
                [[long_forecasting_task]]
                    script = """
                        sleep 2
                        random.sh
                        cylc message -- "${CYLC_SUITE_NAME}" "${CYLC_TASK_JOB}" \
                            "Task partially complete, report ready to view"
                        sleep 2
                        random.sh
                        cylc message -- "${CYLC_SUITE_NAME}" "${CYLC_TASK_JOB}" \
                            "Task partially complete, report updated"
                        sleep 2
                        random.sh
                    """
                  
                    [[[outputs]]]
                        update1 = "Task partially complete, report ready to view"
                        update2 = "Task partially complete, report updated"
                    
                    [[[events]]]
                        mail events = update1, update2    
                
                [[another_weather_task, different_weather_task]]
                    script = sleep 1

>       Save your changes and run your suite. 

Reviewer 2: (see, "your" here, not "our" :grin: )

Author: Oops 🤦
